Practical: 01
 	 
Aim: Create tables using different applications. 
 
a.	Table: Product 
 
   
b.	Table: Category 
 
   
c.	Table: Store 
 
  
 
d.	Table: Employee 
 
   
e.	Table: SalesFact 
 
  
 
 	 
 
Practical: 02
 	 
Aim: Develop an application to design a warehouse by importing various tables from external Sources. 
 
Step 1: To create a DTS Package. 
 
a.	Click on start > SQL server > Enterprise Manager. 
b.	Expand MS SQL Server. 
c.	Right click on DTS and select New Package, it will open editor to create new DTS Package. 
 
 
 
Step 2: Design DTS Package. 
 
a.	Drag & drop MS Access connection to canvas from toolbar. 
 
 
b.	Browse the source file i.e. SalesDB.mdb > Click OK. 
 
 
 
c.	Drag and drop MS OLE DB from toolbar to canvas. 
 
 
 
d.	Select destination DB (if required create new DB) 
 
 
 
 
e.	To transform data from source to target. >Select Transform data task from toolbar and specify Source connection & Destination connection. 
 
 
 
 
Step 3: Right click on transform data task and select Properties > Rename data                Transformations task and specify description (if required). 
 
 
a.	In tables and views, select source table. 
 
 
 
b.	Click on destination tab > specify destination table from drop-down (if it does not exist then create table). It will generate script for destination table. 
 
 	 
c.	Click on transformation tab and delete all the existing default transformations. 
 
 
 
d.	Click on new button to create new transformation >Specify transformation task as copy columns. It will open a window to map source & destination columns. 
 
 
 
e.	Specify source columns >Select all columns of source by clicking on ‘>>’ 
 
 
f.	Click on destination tab select all columns by clicking on’>>’ >It will show mapping of Source and destination. 
 
   
g.	Click OK. 
 
  
h.	Drag & drop Execute SQL task from toolbar to canvas > then provide Description/Name. >After that write a SQL query and Parse the query. 
 
 
 
 
i.	Right click on Execute SQL Task and select Workflow > Workflow Properties. 
 
 
 
j.	It will Open a window, in Precedence tab click on Source Step column select appropriate name from Drop down list & Click OK. 
 
 
 
 
 
k.	Right click on Transform Data Task that connects MS Access Database to MS OLE DB > select Workflow Properties. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
l.	It will open a window, in Precedence tab click on Source Step column select appropriate name from Drop down list & Click OK. 
 
 
 
m.	Repeat same procedure from (Step 3- a. to l.). 
  
 
 
 
 
Step 5: In SalesDB > open tables. 
 
 
 
Step 6: Right click on Table > Select Open Table > Return all rows. 
 
a.	Output of Category Table. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
b.	Output of Employee Table. 
 
 
 
 	 
 
d. Output of SaleFact Table. 
 
 	 
 
Practical: 03
 	 
Aim: Develop an application to creating a fact table and measures in a cube. 
 
Create a new OLAP database: 
 
a.	Open Programs > Microsoft SQL Server > Analysis Services > Analysis Manager. 
b.	Right click the server in the console tree, and click New Database to display the Database dialog Box. 
c.	Type ‘SalesDB’ as the database name. 
d.	Click OK to close the dialog box and to create the database. 
 
Specify a data source: 
 
a.	Expand the ‘MscDB’ folder. Right-click on Cubes Folder > Select New Cube > Select Wizard.  
 
 + 
   
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
b.	Click New Data Source > Select Microsoft OLE DB Provider for SQL Server, and click Next.  
 
   
c.	In the connection Tab Select or enter Server Name. > Select DB on the server from drop down list. Click Test Connection to make sure the data source definition is correct. Then click OK to close the dialog box. 
 
 
  
 
 
d.	Select SalesFact table from the list of tables. 
 
   
e.	Right click on ‘Sales_cube’ and select Edit. It will open Cube editor >Right Click on ‘Sales_Cube’ and Select New Measures >Now create two new measures: ‘Sales’, ‘Quantity’. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NOTE:                    Import Export Steps 
 
A) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
B) 
 
C) 
 
D) 
  
 
 
E) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
F) 
  
G) 
 	 
  
 
 
 
 
 
H) 
I) 
  	 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Practical: 04
 	 
Aim: Develop an application to create dimension tables in a cube and form star schema. 
 
Create a dimension from a Star Schema table: 
 
a.	Click a New Dimension in the Wizard to start the Dimension Wizard. Select the option to skip the welcome screen, and then click on Next. 
 
 
 
b.	Click the Option ‘Star Schema: A Single Dimension Table’, and the click Next. 
 
 
c.	Select ‘SalesFact’ from Available Tables and click next. 
 
 
 
d.	Select Time Dimension >Select Date column From Drop Down: ‘Dates’. & Click Next. 
 
 
e.	Select Time Level: ‘Year, Quarter, Month’ > Click Next. 
 
 
 
f.	Select all and click Next. 
 
 
 
 
g.	Select Yes > Click Next.                
 
 
 
h.	Give Dimension Name: TimeDimension> Click Finish. 
 
 
i.	Create one more dimension: StoreDimension 
 
j.	Click a New Dimension in the Wizard to start the Dimension Wizard. Select the option to skip the welcome screen, and then click on Next. 
 
   
k.	Click the Option ‘Star Schema: A Single Dimension Table’, and the click Next. 
 
 
l.	Select ‘Store’ from Available Tables and click next. 
 
 
 
m.	Specify Dimension Level: ‘Store Id’, ‘Store Name’ > Click Next. 
 
 
 
n.	Select all and Click Next. 
 
  
 
 
 	 
 
 
 
p.	Give Dimension Name: ‘StoreDimension’ > Click Finish. 
 
 
 
q.	Finally, cube is created > Cube Name: ‘Sales_Cube’. 
 
  
Star Schema: 
   
Practical: 05
 	 
Aim: Develop an application to create dimension tables in a cube and form Snowflake Schema. 
 
Create a dimension from Snowflake schema tables: 
 
a.	Click a New Dimension in the Wizard to start the Dimension Wizard. Select the option to skip the welcome screen, and then click on Next. 
 
 
 
b.	Click the Option ‘Snowflake Schema: Multiple, related dimension tables’ and the click Next. 
 
 
c.	Select Product, Category table from Available Tables and click next. 
 
 
d.	Click Next. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
e.	Select Dimension levels : ‘Category’, ‘Brand Name’, ‘Product Name’ 
 
 
 
f.	Click Next. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
g.	Select all and Click Next. 
 
 
 
h.	Select yes and click Next. 
 
 
 
i.	Name  the dimension as : ‘Ashish1_Dimension’ 
  
 
 
View of SnowFlake Schema: 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Practical: 06
 	 
Aim: Develop an application to create a dimension table from Parent-Child schema. 
 
a.	Click a New Dimension in the Wizard to start the Dimension Wizard. Select the option to skip the welcome screen, and then click on Next. 
 
 
b.	Click the Option ‘Parent-Child Schema: A Single Dimension Table’, and the click Next. 
 
 
 
c.	Select tables Product, Category from Available Tables and click next. 
 
 
d.	Select  a. ‘MemberKey’: EmpID  from drop down, b. ‘Parent Key’ :ManagerID  from drop down, c. ‘Member Name’ : Ename  from drop down. > Click Next. 
 
 
 
 
 
g.	Enable Custom Rollups and click next. 
 
  
 
 
h.	Check the option and click next. 
 
 
 
  
 
 
i.	Name the Dimension: ‘EmployeeDimension’ 
 
 
 
View of Parent-Child Schema: 
 
 
  
 	  
Practical: 07
 	 
Aim: Develop an application to demonstrate operations like roll-up, drill-down, slice, and Dice. 
 
a.	Click on Tools in menu bar and select ‘Drillthrough options...’ to perform drillthrough operation on cube. 
 
  
 
  
b.	Check Enable drillthrough option > Click on Select all button and click OK. 
 
 
View of drill-through Data: 
  
  
c.	To perform roll up/down > Right click on your cube > Select Browse Data option 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
d.	To roll up/down through cube > Double click on + to roll-down and - to roll-up. 
 
   
e.	To perform slice operation > Select a particular value for one dimension. Similarly to perform dice operation = > Select a value for each dimension, result will be a sub-cube containing a value with respect to other dimensions. 
 
  
 
 
 	 
 

Practical: 08
 	 
Aim: Develop an application to demonstrate processing and browsing data from a cube. 
 
Processing a cube: 
 
a. Right click on existing cube and select Process. 
 
  
 
 
  
 
Browsing data in a cube : 
 
a. Right click on existing cube and select Browse Data. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A cube browser will open. 
 
  
 
Double click a member to drill up(-) or down(+). 
 
  
To view data with respect to particular dimension, select particular value from drop-down to analyze. 
 
 
 
.Practical: 09
 	 
Aim: Develop an application to pre-process data imported from external sources. 
 
a.	Right click on your cube > Select Edit > It will open a cube editor. 
 
 
 
 
b.	Right click on your cube and select New Dimension >Click the Option Star Schema: A Single Dimension Table, and the click Next. 
 
 
 
c.	Select table Product from Available Tables and click Next. 
 
 
 
 
d.	Add the required columns in dimension levels. 
 
 	 
 
 
e.	Select all and Click Next. 
 
 	 
 
 
 
 
 
g.	Give Dimension Name: StoreDimension. > Click Finish. 
 
 
 
h.	To create new measure > Right click on your cube > Select New Measure -> Select the table for which a new measure will be created in fact table. 
 
 
 
 
i.	Adding a new calculated member in our cube ‘Commission > Right Click on Calculated Members > Select New Calculated Members. > Provide a valid expression on an existing measure whose value will be calculated and stored in this new measure. > Click OK. 
 
 
 
Resultant view of cube: 
 
 
To Create Pivot table and charts: 
 
a.	Open Microsoft Excel > In the Data tab click on from other sources > click on From Analysis Services. It will a Data Connection Wizard > Enter the name of your analysis server, choose the authentication method > Click Next. 
 
 
 
b.	Select the database that contains the cube -> Select the cube to be used. 
 
 
 
 
c.	Click Finish. 
 
 
 
d.	Select Pivot_Chart and PivotTableReport option and click OK. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
e.	A chart with the default layout will be shown and in the right pane is the FieldList  from values and fields can be selected for chart/pivot table. 
 
 
 
f.	After selecting measures with respect to ProductDimension. 
 
 
 
 
Pivot table for the same values of measures and dimensions : 
 
 
 
h. Adding more dimensions to our chart: ‘TimeDimension’ 
 
 
 
Pivot the same values of measures and dimensions : 
 
 
 
